Yeah, yeah.
NOTE CONF
Of course.
Music comes after you.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Hello, everyone.
Uh, the lecture is starting, but before the lecture is
NOTE CONF
starting, I'm here from Comstock.
Uh, and I'd like to announce an event we're going
NOTE CONF
to be doing this week.
Uh, maybe some of you have just been to the
NOTE CONF
Informatics fair.
Right now.
NOTE CONF
We're going to have a similar event.
It's going to be the sig fair where you can
NOTE CONF
find out more about a special interest groups.
We have one for AI theoretical computer science, quant server
NOTE CONF
management, personal projects, cybersecurity, cloud stuff, computer architecture, game development
and competitive programming.
NOTE CONF
So if any of those sound like they might be
of interest to you, this event is going to take
NOTE CONF
place on September 21st this Saturday at 3 p.m..
Uh, it's from 3 to 530.
NOTE CONF
If you show up at three, there's going to be
a welcome talk where all the sigs introduce themselves.
NOTE CONF
You can find out what they do, what kind of
events you can attend and how you can get involved.
NOTE CONF
And after that you can chat to the different committees.
Uh, so yeah, that's going to be that's going to
NOTE CONF
be this Saturday.
There's also going to be free pizza if that's a
NOTE CONF
deal maker for any of you.
And if this sounds interesting, join our discord.
NOTE CONF
We will have more announcements about that there.
And of course see you guys on Saturday.
NOTE CONF
And now over to Don.
Enjoy this lecture.
NOTE CONF
Where is it.
Oh this is going to be in the Informatics Forum.
NOTE CONF
Thank you very much okay.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Thank you guys.
NOTE CONF
Thanks.
Thanks very much.
NOTE CONF
Thanks.
Thanks, Martin.
NOTE CONF
Um, right.
So, uh, lecture time.
NOTE CONF
All.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So that was a theme from Indiana Jones, as you
probably recognised.
NOTE CONF
Um, put us in the right state of mind for
our, um, first lecture on functional programming.
NOTE CONF
So this lecture is going to be on two things.
Um, so first of all, I'm going to be telling
NOTE CONF
you what is functional programming and why you want to
learn about it.
NOTE CONF
That's about the first half of the lecture.
And then the second half of the lecture.
NOTE CONF
I'm going to be starting to actually teach you functional
programming, starting with very simple concepts, um, types and values.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, let's get started.
NOTE CONF
So, um, who has heard of object oriented programming?
Anybody?
NOTE CONF
Okay, everybody.
Almost.
NOTE CONF
Or maybe everybody.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Who has heard?
Um, you know, so that's that's that's things like Java
NOTE CONF
C plus plus, uh, many programming languages.
So who before they, uh, started reading about what's in
NOTE CONF
this course, uh, had heard of functional programming before.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
A fair number of people, but less than half.
All right.
NOTE CONF
That's not surprising.
Okay, so Haskell is a functional programming language.
NOTE CONF
Why are we teaching functional programming in Haskell?
All right, so, um, does anybody know what Turing Award
NOTE CONF
is?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
And yeah.
Can you just say, um.
NOTE CONF
I'm sorry, the.
What did.
NOTE CONF
You say?
What?
NOTE CONF
The Turing.
Turing award, the highest award in computer science.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So it's like the Nobel Prize of of computer science
NOTE CONF
named after Alan Turing.
I mentioned this because two of the names on this
NOTE CONF
slide are Turing Award winners.
So this is like people you have to take seriously
NOTE CONF
when they say things.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, some quotations about the relationship between computation and
language.
NOTE CONF
Um, at least that's why I'm telling you about this,
uh, these quotations.
NOTE CONF
So the first one is by Edsger Dijkstra, Turing Award
winner.
NOTE CONF
Um, he was one of the first computer scientists to
take programming seriously as a kind of scientific activity, rather
NOTE CONF
than just trying to sort of get programs to do
stuff by putting putting instructions in the right order and
NOTE CONF
so forth.
So he's looking at it as a serious intellectual activity.
NOTE CONF
And he he wrote that computer science is no more
about computers than astronomy is about telescopes.
NOTE CONF
And what he means by that is that, you know,
astronomers don't, uh, devote their their intellectual effort to the,
NOTE CONF
the gadgets on their telescopes and, you know, how to
focus them and so forth.
NOTE CONF
They're they're interested in the stars and the planets and
things they can see through the telescopes.
NOTE CONF
Telescope is just a tool.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And computer science is about computation, and the computer is
a device that we use to do computation.
NOTE CONF
But computer scientists are, you know, just well, you you
get the analogy, I hope.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So the important thing is computation and how computation works,
NOTE CONF
the limits of computation, that sort of thing.
Okay, so that was him.
NOTE CONF
Um, the next two people here are um.
So Benjamin Lee Warf was a, was a linguist, and
NOTE CONF
he invented something called linguistic relativity.
Uh, and, uh, Wittgenstein, a famous philosopher, had similar ideas.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this is about the way that language and
the structure of language, um, determines the kind of things
NOTE CONF
you can say and the kind of things you can
think about.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And, um, the standard example of this kind of thing,
NOTE CONF
which are probably urban legends, but I'll say them anyway
because it makes it easy to understand.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So supposedly people who live in the in the Arctic
NOTE CONF
have lots of different words for describing snow, okay?
Because there's lots of snow.
NOTE CONF
There's different kinds of snow.
They need different words for talking about the different kinds
NOTE CONF
of snow.
Um, and people who live in rain forests supposedly have
NOTE CONF
lots of words for different kinds of green, because there's
lots of green there, right?
NOTE CONF
They need to be able to distinguish between them.
So, um, uh, as I said, these are possibly not
NOTE CONF
actually accurate examples, but they give you the idea that
if you're if you have 27 words for talking about
NOTE CONF
snow, you can say much more subtle things about snow
than if you just have the word snow.
NOTE CONF
Right.
And similarly, you know, different colours of greens and so
NOTE CONF
forth.
So the, the fact that you have ways of saying
NOTE CONF
things, um, certain things means you have ways of, of,
of thinking about those things.
NOTE CONF
All right.
And this is the idea, the language shapes the way
NOTE CONF
that we think and determines what we can think about.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And programming languages, uh, similarly, they determine the way that
you think about computation because they're about about computation.
NOTE CONF
And then finally, the last person on this slide happens
to be.
NOTE CONF
So he's the first Turing Award winner, happens to be
the the guy who taught my first, uh, my first
NOTE CONF
lectures on, on on computer science when I was a
undergraduate student a million years ago.
NOTE CONF
Um, so he was he was here and I was
there, and, uh, and he taught me, um, about programming
NOTE CONF
way back then, and he said a language that doesn't
affect the way you think about programming is not worth
NOTE CONF
knowing.
Okay, so my goal in teaching you functional programming is
NOTE CONF
to get you to think at a higher level about
programming.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, Haskell is just a vehicle for that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So I'm going to be teaching you about Haskell, but
NOTE CONF
I really want to teach you about about programming and
high level thinking about programming.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
High level.
NOTE CONF
Uh.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
I hope it's clear why high level is good.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
So what?
What is functional programming?
NOTE CONF
Okay, so as the as the name suggests, um, functions
are the main thing.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Functional programming functions.
NOTE CONF
Um, not.
So what is not the main thing?
NOTE CONF
So, um, uh, not assignment of values to variables.
Now, I say this for people who've done programming before.
NOTE CONF
It's very common in a programming language other than a
functional programming language.
NOTE CONF
You would write a statement like um, n equals three,
and then later on you'd have a statement that says
NOTE CONF
um n equals n plus one.
So this means take the value of n, add one
NOTE CONF
to it and assign it to a variable n okay.
This is assignment of values to variables.
NOTE CONF
So functional programming this is not important.
In fact, it's so unimportant that it doesn't.
NOTE CONF
It's not possible.
There are no variables that you can assign values to.
NOTE CONF
There are variables and they have values, but you don't
like.
NOTE CONF
Update the value of a variable by adding one to
what it was previously.
NOTE CONF
It isn't.
It isn't possible.
NOTE CONF
There's ways to do things that are what you were
trying to do when you wrote that.
NOTE CONF
Uh, but you can't write statements like that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's interesting.
Um, so functional programming, you take a bunch of simple
NOTE CONF
but very powerful ideas in combination, taken to their logical
extreme.
NOTE CONF
And you get a very, a very powerful, uh, uh,
way of writing programs, usually very short programs in comparison
NOTE CONF
with, um, object oriented programming languages.
Okay, really, you know, one line programs instead of instead
NOTE CONF
of 50 line programs.
So, um, let me show you, uh.
NOTE CONF
So in this week's in this week's sort of, you
know, page with the lecture slides and so forth, I've
NOTE CONF
put a link to, uh, uh, something on Quora.
I don't know if, you know, Quora.
NOTE CONF
It's a sort of place where people ask and answer
questions.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So somebody asked a question about about programming paradigms other
NOTE CONF
than object oriented.
Um, I'll tell you what a programming paradigm is in
NOTE CONF
a minute.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And this is somebody who, uh, um, wrote an answer
about functional programming is black magic.
NOTE CONF
And I put this here partly because it's interesting to
read and to get his opinion about this, uh, which
NOTE CONF
which I agree with, um, and the fact that he's
saying it rather than me means it's not just it's
NOTE CONF
not just me that thinks this.
It's a it's a it's at least one other person
NOTE CONF
in the world.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, as it says here, um, uh, Haskell will
thoroughly blow your mind.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
My aim in teaching you Haskell is to is to
NOTE CONF
blow your mind in a kind of good way.
A way that will improve your mind.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so.
So it's worth reading this.
NOTE CONF
It's fun.
It's interesting.
NOTE CONF
Um, and he talks about the reasons why it's special
and and good and so forth.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
It's not very long.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Uh, that's worth having a look at.
NOTE CONF
So where was I?
Uh.
NOTE CONF
Right here.
So what do I mean by a programming paradigm?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
A programming paradigm is a way of looking at programming
NOTE CONF
and the relationship between programming and the world.
The real world.
NOTE CONF
Okay, the thing that you're trying to write a program
in order to, um.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, in order to do something useful.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, so functional programming is a paradigm object oriented
programming is another paradigm.
NOTE CONF
There are others.
Okay, so it's a way of looking at programming and
NOTE CONF
the relationship between programming and and the world.
So in functional programming, things in the world, okay, people,
NOTE CONF
uh, objects and stuff, you know, that are moving around.
These are values, data values.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You use functions to compute with with data values to
NOTE CONF
get other values.
This is like what you do in functional programming.
NOTE CONF
In object oriented programming.
Things in the world are what are called objects.
NOTE CONF
That's why it's called object oriented programming.
And there are things called methods that you use to
NOTE CONF
change objects.
So you operate on the objects using methods.
NOTE CONF
And the the reason you do that is you want
to change something about the object.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so if an object is a car, you might
NOTE CONF
have a method which is um, speed up or something
like that, and it will change the velocity of the
NOTE CONF
car from what it was to a larger number.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so here are some examples of, um.
Wait a minute.
NOTE CONF
Uh, here are some examples of functional programming languages.
Here are some examples of object oriented programming languages.
NOTE CONF
Some of the languages are in both categories because they
combine features of both.
NOTE CONF
So Scala is an example.
Uh, JavaScript is another example f sharp okay.
NOTE CONF
So there's no ultimate perfect language or ultimate perfect programming
paradigm.
NOTE CONF
There are advantages and disadvantages to all of them.
Um, and so you need to learn more than one.
NOTE CONF
And that's why we teach you in first semester functional
programming and second semester object oriented programming.
NOTE CONF
Um, so, uh, so I said on the previous slide,
um, or maybe I didn't say it, but, uh, functional
NOTE CONF
programming is is is less widely used than object oriented
programming.
NOTE CONF
Why do we bother teaching it to you while it
is still widely used?
NOTE CONF
Not not as popular as object oriented programming, and it's
used to do useful things in industry.
NOTE CONF
And here are some examples.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Google.
NOTE CONF
So when you type a query in Google, you get
an answer very fast.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, uh, that's pretty impressive considering how big the internet
NOTE CONF
is.
And it's searching through gazillion pages on the internet.
NOTE CONF
How does it do that?
Okay.
NOTE CONF
The way it does that is that Google has, um,
warehouses full of computers, and they're all working in parallel,
NOTE CONF
uh, solving problems.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, they index the entire internet, um, uh, so
that they can answer queries quickly.
NOTE CONF
And when you give them a query, they will be
working in parallel on that query, doing different things on
NOTE CONF
it, maybe trying different, different things and and then deciding
what the best answer is.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And that all happens lightning fast.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And the mechanism that they use is something called MapReduce.
NOTE CONF
So this is a this is a way to break
problems up into into smaller problems, compute the solution to
NOTE CONF
the smaller problems, then combine those solutions into the solution
to the main problem.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So this is a thing.
NOTE CONF
And um it's what they use to, to uh, to
program their warehouses full of uh, full of computers.
NOTE CONF
And this is directly from functional programming.
So I will be teaching you about a function called
NOTE CONF
map.
And, um, and I'll be teaching you about another function
NOTE CONF
called fold, which is the Haskell, uh, version of what's
called reduce here.
NOTE CONF
And, uh, putting those together gives you exactly, uh, this
this MapReduce idea.
NOTE CONF
And, um, so this is from functional programming from the
1960s.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so this is not directly using Haskell and functional
NOTE CONF
programming, but it's using the ideas.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Directly using Haskell.
Um, you know, there's stuff in Facebook that uses Haskell.
NOTE CONF
There's, um, stuff in Twitter that uses Scala, which is
a functional object oriented programming language.
NOTE CONF
Um, here's another example.
There's a lot of banks that use functional programming.
NOTE CONF
What they're doing is automated trading on the stock market.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And, um.
Uh, so this is, this is doing trading without human
NOTE CONF
intervention.
So the the program recognises some condition on the stock
NOTE CONF
market and, and buys shares and sells shares sometimes, uh,
with a sort of millisecond in between, because it recognises
NOTE CONF
that there's a temporary difference in price between different markets
and so forth.
NOTE CONF
Anyway, complicated?
All right.
NOTE CONF
But there's lots of money involved.
It's doing this in an automated way.
NOTE CONF
And if you if you buy if you buy high
and sell low, you lose money.
NOTE CONF
Uh, what you want to do is buy low and
sell high, okay.
NOTE CONF
And if you make a mistake in your program and
you do things the wrong way around, you can you
NOTE CONF
can lose a lot of money very quickly.
And this has actually happened.
NOTE CONF
So there's been companies that have gone out of business
because in a half an hour they're there.
NOTE CONF
Automated stock market trading, um, had had a bug in
it and it and it ruptured, you know, billions of
NOTE CONF
dollars in a half an hour before they could turn
it off.
NOTE CONF
Um, anyway, so these, these companies, among others, use functional
programming, um, to do some of their, um, automated stock
NOTE CONF
market trading.
And the idea is that they can write programs that
NOTE CONF
are they can write them quickly.
They're easy to read, they're easy to understand.
NOTE CONF
They're easy to, you know, check that they're doing what
they should do as opposed to some, you know, hundreds
NOTE CONF
of thousands of lines of Java or something like that.
Um, okay.
NOTE CONF
There's other examples.
I'll just mention the last one.
NOTE CONF
It's a it's a fun example.
So Ericsson is a is a Swedish telephone, uh, telecommunications
NOTE CONF
company.
They had a project in the 70s or 80s to,
NOTE CONF
to build a new phone switch.
So a phone switch is the thing which connects telephone
NOTE CONF
calls, uh, together.
All right.
NOTE CONF
And so they had they had this project to build
their, their next generation telephone switch.
NOTE CONF
And they and they started programming it in C plus
plus.
NOTE CONF
And after a couple of years, they, uh, it was
a disaster.
NOTE CONF
They gave up um, uh, they, they said they couldn't
do it.
NOTE CONF
It was just too complicated.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so, um, somebody said, why don't we try functional
programming They invented a language called Erlang, which is a
NOTE CONF
functional programming language with some special features for this kind
of situation.
NOTE CONF
And and the project, they they successfully built a software
in record time and it achieves it achieves what's called
NOTE CONF
nine nines, uh, reliability.
So this is 99.99999999% reliability.
NOTE CONF
It means that it's only, um, it's only allowed to,
um, to fail for a few seconds per century.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And, um, uh, this is, uh, you know, the software
NOTE CONF
is so is so high quality that it achieves that
partly because of parallelism.
NOTE CONF
This is one of the things that's in Erlang that's
not, um, that you're not going to be learning about
NOTE CONF
in this course.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So these are just some places that PHP has learned
is used in industry.
NOTE CONF
We've got a talk on Thursday from a guy working
from a company called grok, which does, um, large language
NOTE CONF
models.
Um, and, um, I'm interested to see what he's going
NOTE CONF
to tell us about, because they use Haskell in their,
um, in the programming for their, for their large language
NOTE CONF
models, which is interesting.
Um, new thing for me anyway.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, it's important to learn many languages in different paradigms
NOTE CONF
in your computer science or informatics career.
Um, and, and so we, we, we give you two
NOTE CONF
of them in the first, in the first year, um,
functional programming followed by object oriented programming.
NOTE CONF
The order that you do these things is controversial, and
we do it that way around.
NOTE CONF
In common with some other good universities in Britain and
around the world.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Uh, we think it's the right choice.
NOTE CONF
Um, one of the reasons why we do this is
because it puts everybody on, on the same level when
NOTE CONF
they start.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So those of you who've done lots of programming before,
and those of you who've done no programming before.
NOTE CONF
And we have both both kinds of students here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, the ones who've done lots of programming before don't
have, uh, they have a certain kind of advantage in
NOTE CONF
being used to thinking about about programs and how computers
compute.
NOTE CONF
But they won't have experience mostly with functional programming, and
it'll be quite new to them.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it'll be something that you have to, in a
NOTE CONF
way, forget some of the things that you know already
in order to understand what I'm going to be talking
NOTE CONF
to you about.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Now, this last thing here, uh, functional programming operates on
data structures as a whole rather than piecemeal.
NOTE CONF
Let me explain what I mean by that.
Okay, so imagine you've got your you're working in in
NOTE CONF
Java or another object oriented programming language.
You've got a big data structure.
NOTE CONF
Let's say you've got an array.
Here's an array.
NOTE CONF
It's an array of numbers.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, there's a million numbers in this array.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let me see.
Left to right.
NOTE CONF
Uh, I guess it's from here.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So the first number, the in array is there, the
NOTE CONF
second number in the array is here and so forth.
There's a million of them.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Suppose that you want to multiply each of the numbers
NOTE CONF
in this array by two.
Or do something else with it okay.
NOTE CONF
Each number in the array you want to do something
with it.
NOTE CONF
Let's say multiply by two to keep things simple okay.
So what do you do.
NOTE CONF
You you you take the first one, you multiply it
by two and you put it back.
NOTE CONF
And then you take the second one and you multiply
it by two, and you put it back and the
NOTE CONF
third one and so forth.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
One at a time.
You write a loop, what's called a loop, which has
NOTE CONF
an index into the array, and it says, you know,
a sub, a sub n uh equals a sub n
NOTE CONF
times two.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
For, for n from 1 to 1 million.
Uh, okay.
NOTE CONF
And so it's going one at a time down this
array doing this okay.
NOTE CONF
Um tick tick tick tick tick.
Tick tick tick tick.
NOTE CONF
Tick a million times.
Okay, a million operations.
NOTE CONF
That's standard object oriented programming, okay.
In functional language.
NOTE CONF
You do it differently.
You'd you'd you'd write a function, a very simple function,
NOTE CONF
which is the function for multiplying a number by two.
You take your, your array which in functional programming would
NOTE CONF
be called a list.
But it's the same idea.
NOTE CONF
You've got a million values one at a time here.
And you'd say apply this function to this array and.
NOTE CONF
Whoosh.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
It just sort of all happens conceptually at once.
You apply this function to everything in the array.
NOTE CONF
Whoosh!
Okay.
NOTE CONF
That's a technical term.
Whoosh.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Not really.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So it's it's higher level.
NOTE CONF
It's not doing a little bit at a time.
You're not writing a loop to tell you, you know,
NOTE CONF
that you start at the beginning and work your way
down to the end, rather than starting at the at
NOTE CONF
the other end and working your way back to the
beginning.
NOTE CONF
You don't need to, uh, you know, you don't need
to write any of that code.
NOTE CONF
You just say, apply the function to everything in this
list, and it just happens.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this is what I mean.
It's it's it's it's, uh, operating on data structures as
NOTE CONF
a whole.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so there's, um, this is this is allowing you
to have higher level thinking about algorithms, and you might
NOTE CONF
say, well, you know, that's that's cheating because of course
inside the computer it's going to take the function and
NOTE CONF
apply it first to the to the first thing in
the list and then to the second thing, the list
NOTE CONF
and so forth.
So actually they're equivalent.
NOTE CONF
And that's true okay.
But you're not writing any of this detail about about
NOTE CONF
doing the, you know, the things in a row left
to right or right to left or whatever it is.
NOTE CONF
It's kind of like when you when you write a
program that, you know, does arithmetic, you don't think in
NOTE CONF
terms of the binary digits that are used to encode
the integers, or the or the or the other numbers
NOTE CONF
that you're using.
You don't need to think about the algorithm for for
NOTE CONF
adding binary numbers.
That's in the computer.
NOTE CONF
And it just it just happens.
You just think about addition and numbers, okay.
NOTE CONF
You don't think about the electrons that are used to
encode the bits in the computer.
NOTE CONF
Right?
So that's low level stuff.
NOTE CONF
You don't think about it.
You think about numbers in addition.
NOTE CONF
And so here you're thinking about data structures and operating
on the whole data structure.
NOTE CONF
Okay, that's the difference.
That's important.
NOTE CONF
I'll just mention before I finished my advertising, uh, that,
um, uh, functional languages have influenced lots of other languages.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And I'll just mention a couple of things on this
NOTE CONF
list here.
So garbage collection, this is, this refers to, um, uh,
NOTE CONF
automated um, allocation and d allocation of storage in, in
programming.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um, in, in, in Haskell and in other functional
NOTE CONF
programming languages, uh, storage is allocated.
And when you're finished using it, it's automated automatically garbage
NOTE CONF
collected or deallocated.
So you don't run out of storage.
NOTE CONF
You can reuse it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And um, this is also um, this is also done
in these other languages.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
But um, many, many, many years later.
NOTE CONF
So garbage collection was invented in 1960 for a programming
language called Lisp, which was the first functional programming language,
NOTE CONF
and Java um was invented in 1995.
And it was a kind of, um, uh, exciting innovation
NOTE CONF
that it was using garbage collection rather than doing manual
allocation and de allocation.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, so that's some 35 years later.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, c plus plus when you go to the airport
NOTE CONF
or someplace and you see a computer screen, it's supposed
to be telling you when your flight is leaving and
NOTE CONF
it and it says, um, uh, and has an error
message, okay, that's the C plus plus program, which has
NOTE CONF
had an error with with storage allocation usually.
Okay, okay.
NOTE CONF
And there's other things here that I won't go into
in detail.
NOTE CONF
But in each case it's it's stuff that um, came
from functional programming languages influence mainstream programming language many years
NOTE CONF
later.
Okay, list comprehensions, I'm going to be telling you about
NOTE CONF
them in the next lecture.
Um, now, now also in Python.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Any questions so far I'm now going to get into
NOTE CONF
the actual, uh, content of functional programming.
Anybody know?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Never mind.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I'm going to be telling you about values
and types.
NOTE CONF
So these are the most important things to start with.
Anyway, in functional programming, um, it's going to be important
NOTE CONF
for you to read the textbook.
Um, partly because not because this is so hard, but
NOTE CONF
because there's details that I'm not going to talk about
in the lecture.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Details like, um, the, the way that you type in,
NOTE CONF
uh, Strings that have special, that have special characters in
them.
NOTE CONF
All that stuff I'm not going to go into in
the lectures.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so we compute with values in Haskell and here
are some examples of values.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You can read these yourself.
NOTE CONF
There's things like numbers and strings.
Um truth values.
NOTE CONF
You could have a value which is a date.
Although that's not built in.
NOTE CONF
You could have a value which is a person okay.
These things at the end.
NOTE CONF
These are functions.
Square root function.
NOTE CONF
Addition function a function that takes the length of a
of a of a data structure.
NOTE CONF
It gives you a number and maybe a function which
takes a person.
NOTE CONF
It tells you whether they're alive or not.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, so these are values.
Functions are values just like numbers or values okay.
NOTE CONF
There's no uh, there's no special way that you need
to treat functions.
NOTE CONF
Well, of course you do different things with functions than
you do with values, but there's no way in which
NOTE CONF
you need to treat them specially because their functions, you
know, it isn't like.
NOTE CONF
So an example is you can build data structures that
have numbers in them, and you can build data structures
NOTE CONF
that have functions in them.
And it's exactly the same.
NOTE CONF
Uh, you know, there's no special difficulty in having the
functions in the data structure.
NOTE CONF
It's the same thing.
It's just a value, okay?
NOTE CONF
Every value has a type.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Types are very important.
I'll tell you what types are.
NOTE CONF
Um, every value has a type.
And we use this notation value uh double colon type
NOTE CONF
okay.
So there's a vocabulary of types that are built into
NOTE CONF
Haskell.
And you can also build your you can also define
NOTE CONF
your own types.
So one of the types is integers abbreviated int.
NOTE CONF
So integers are numbers without decimal points you know 012
negative numbers as well okay.
NOTE CONF
So 42 is an example.
Um Strings.
NOTE CONF
Uh, these are, uh, you know, they have double quotes
around them.
NOTE CONF
Uh, that's a that's a type, um, false.
This is a truth value.
NOTE CONF
Uh, we call it a bool.
Bool stands for Boolean, which is named after George Boole,
NOTE CONF
who was a one of, well, the first logician in
the in the 1800s.
NOTE CONF
Um, so truth value is true and false, okay.
And so forth.
NOTE CONF
Uh, this would be a date.
This would be a person, perhaps.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, functions.
NOTE CONF
The type is not just that.
It's a function.
NOTE CONF
It says what kind of function it is.
So function types, uh, always have these, these this, this
NOTE CONF
thing, this sort of hyphen greater than, which is meant
to represent an arrow.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So square root function takes a float to a float.
NOTE CONF
A float is a is a number which might have
a decimal point in it.
NOTE CONF
It might be in scientific notation like uh, 2.7, uh
times ten to the 23rd or whatever it is.
NOTE CONF
So there's a notation for writing that in Haskell.
It's called a float or floating point number.
NOTE CONF
Um, so square root takes one of those and produces
another one of those.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, the plus function um, takes two takes two, two
NOTE CONF
numbers.
For example, it takes two integers and produces an integer.
NOTE CONF
And the way that you write functions which take more
than one uh, value, uh, is is like this okay.
NOTE CONF
Not int okay.
It's int arrow int arrow int.
NOTE CONF
And I'll explain why in a later lecture okay.
But just for now that's the way you do it
NOTE CONF
in Haskell usually.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Length takes a string gives you an int and uh,
and so forth.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So um, so function names always have capital letters at
NOTE CONF
the beginning.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Sorry, not function names, type names, type names, int string,
and so forth.
NOTE CONF
Have capital letters at the beginning.
Function names have lowercase letters at the beginning, except when
NOTE CONF
they have symbolic names.
Okay with me so far this is all very easy.
NOTE CONF
Um, now what do you do with values and functions?
Um, so here is uh, some examples that are related
NOTE CONF
to things that are in the first tutorial exercise.
Um, so the optional part of the first tutorial exercise,
NOTE CONF
you are going to be doing things with pictures of
chess pieces.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And here is a it doesn't matter if you've never
NOTE CONF
played chess, you just need to know that there are
these pictures of things.
NOTE CONF
So, um, this is this is called a knight.
It's a black knight.
NOTE CONF
It looks like a horse.
Okay, so a knight uh, is a chess piece.
NOTE CONF
And we're where.
Where?
NOTE CONF
We're using the name picture for the type.
Okay?
NOTE CONF
Because we're going to be building pictures of chess pieces,
but also pictures of multiple chess pieces, um, put together.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so, so suppose we have a knight and it
looks like this, this black, this black picture.
NOTE CONF
And suppose we've got a function called invert which takes
a picture to picture.
NOTE CONF
And it's what it does is it takes the kind
of photographic negative.
NOTE CONF
So it turns black to white and white to black.
So if you apply it to this, to this, to
NOTE CONF
this black chess piece on a white background, you get
a white chess piece on a black, black background, okay.
NOTE CONF
That's what the invert function does.
This thing is called um, this is the function.
NOTE CONF
This is called uh, the argument or the parameter.
I'm going to be using both of those names.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, And one thing to notice here is that you
NOTE CONF
don't need to use.
I'm just mentioning this because in many programming languages you
NOTE CONF
need to use parentheses to write function applications.
You don't need to do it here.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So let's see is this going to work right.
NOTE CONF
Invert night.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So function applied to argument.
In many languages you would have to write this.
NOTE CONF
Um in Haskell you can write that if you want.
Parentheses are used for grouping okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, you don't have to write the parentheses because night
is already a group.
NOTE CONF
You don't have to kind of put it in parentheses
to make it a group, okay?
NOTE CONF
You're allowed to do it.
In fact, you're allowed to do it as many times
NOTE CONF
as you want.
If you wish, you can also put parentheses around invert.
NOTE CONF
You can also put a parentheses around the whole thing.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Uh, you don't have to.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Simplest way is as it's shown there.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, the reason why we don't require parentheses partly
is because, um, you tend to write in functional programming,
NOTE CONF
you tend to write expressions combining functions, which tend to
get sometimes a little bit long.
NOTE CONF
And there will be parentheses in there to group things
so that you know which parts have to be done
NOTE CONF
before other parts and so forth.
And adding extra parentheses makes things more cluttered, so we
NOTE CONF
try to avoid them when we can.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Now combining functions.
So here's an example where we're taking, um, a black
NOTE CONF
knight doing various things to it and coming out Here's
the Black Knight.
NOTE CONF
We're doing various things.
We're coming out with a picture that looks like this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Using some some, some functions okay.
NOTE CONF
So there's a function called beside which takes two pictures
and produces a picture by putting the first one, uh,
NOTE CONF
to the left of the second one.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So here's beside applied to a white knight on a
black black brown background and a black knight on a
NOTE CONF
white background.
You get this picture here.
NOTE CONF
Um, we've seen invert already.
And then flip V is a function for taking a
NOTE CONF
picture and flipping it around a vertical axis.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Like that.
So you take a, uh, a left, you take a
NOTE CONF
left facing black Knight, you do a flip V and
you get a right facing Black Knight.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And so this, this combination of functions and and the
NOTE CONF
value knight.
Is, uh, pictorially.
NOTE CONF
You can see it here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Invert the invert the black knight, flip it around its
vertical axis.
NOTE CONF
Put the first one of those beside the second one.
You get that okay.
NOTE CONF
Is that clear.
And here you need the parentheses because beside is applied
NOTE CONF
to um the result of applying invert tonight and the
result of applying flip V tonight okay.
NOTE CONF
So you need the parentheses.
So these are not there because you need them for
NOTE CONF
function application.
They're there for because you need them for grouping.
NOTE CONF
So that's combining functions together to do things more complicated
things with objects.
NOTE CONF
And um you can is that all clear so far.
Yeah okay.
NOTE CONF
You can define a function which packages this up.
Um, because maybe you want to, to do it to
NOTE CONF
more things than just this picture of a black knight.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so you can define it.
You can define a function which will do the similar
NOTE CONF
thing to any picture, including complicated pictures.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So, um, so what we had a minute ago was,
was, was this expression here beside invert night and flip
NOTE CONF
V night.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So here is a function which does the same thing
not just to a night but to any but to
NOTE CONF
any picture P okay, so we use a variable to
stand for a picture.
NOTE CONF
And then we have the thing that we had on
the previous uh previous slide there.
NOTE CONF
And we're doing it not with a knight but with
P okay.
NOTE CONF
We're calling this function double.
And it's a function which takes a picture and produces
NOTE CONF
a picture okay.
It takes, it takes for example, this black knight.
NOTE CONF
And it produces this more complicated picture with a black
knight and a white knight.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And inside the box it's doing, it's doing what we
NOTE CONF
saw on the last slide.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But, you know, you package this up and so you
see it as a, as a unit which, which does
NOTE CONF
this thing.
Uh, and not just to night, but to anything.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So so that's our first function definition.
NOTE CONF
Function definitions are written using an equation like that function
name on the left with a variable for the for
NOTE CONF
the argument or the parameter okay.
And then the function body here which says what you
NOTE CONF
do with that thing to get the answer.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
This thing at the beginning is the so-called type signature.
So this is declaring what kind of function it is.
NOTE CONF
It's not required.
Um, Haskell will figure it out for itself if you
NOTE CONF
don't write it down.
But it's good.
NOTE CONF
It's good, good practice to write it down, to make
clear what it is you're trying to do.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's defining new function.
NOTE CONF
Um, and this is just now that you've defined it.
It's just a thing.
NOTE CONF
You don't have to have a you don't have to
know what's inside the box.
NOTE CONF
You just have to know that it does what's shown
there.
NOTE CONF
Okay, I'm running out of time.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Nevertheless, I will show you, um, so we can right
define other functions like, um, let's suppose that, um, we
NOTE CONF
want a function.
By the way, I said p, the letter p, you
NOTE CONF
can use any, any variable you like.
It could be x or n or pick or something
NOTE CONF
like that.
So um, suppose that we want to have a function
NOTE CONF
which, um.
Takes a picture and takes three copies of them of
NOTE CONF
it and puts them, uh, puts them together left to
right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We could call that triple.
NOTE CONF
Uh, we could write, uh, the the signature as well.
I should do this to, um.
NOTE CONF
I said it was best practice, so I'll do it.
Okay, so there's a there's a function which would take,
NOTE CONF
for example, a night, give you three copies next to
each other.
NOTE CONF
I could have written I could have written, um, this
instead.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
I get the same result.
NOTE CONF
Does anybody know what the property of beside is that,
uh, that says that these are equal?
NOTE CONF
It's a it's a it's a mathematical concept.
Uh, do you have your hand up?
NOTE CONF
Not commutative, but you're close associative, right.
It's associative.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Commutative is is is uh, close but different.
NOTE CONF
So here is associativity of plus.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Here is here's commutativity of plus.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Beside is associative.
Um you could you can use a notation in Haskell
NOTE CONF
to make it a little bit tidier.
It's a little bit hard to see what's going on
NOTE CONF
here okay.
You can write.
NOTE CONF
And the reason is because beside is what's called a
prefix function.
NOTE CONF
You you write the function name and then the argument.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, you can take uh functions which take two
arguments like beside and you can write them differently.
NOTE CONF
So let me just do that.
The notation is to use what are called back quotes.
NOTE CONF
So these are like quotation marks.
But you'll find them on your keyboard in a different
NOTE CONF
place from the usual quotation mark.
Um, they lean backwards.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
You can write this like that.
NOTE CONF
This is equivalent to actually the second one of those.
Or you can write it like this.
NOTE CONF
Uh, sorry.
My handwriting is always sloppy.
NOTE CONF
Um, or you can leave out the parentheses, because actually,
the fact that this thing is, um, associative means it
NOTE CONF
doesn't matter which way around you do the grouping.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, can you read that?
I hope it's clear enough.
NOTE CONF
Um, okay.
Uh, so, uh, so beside is associative.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Two copies of of.
NOTE CONF
P.
Next to another copy of P is the same as
NOTE CONF
a copy of P next to two copies of P
okay.
NOTE CONF
Is is beside commutative.
No it isn't.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Because, um, a knight next to a bishop is not
NOTE CONF
the same as a bishop next to a knight.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, running.
Really running out of time here.
NOTE CONF
Um, so I'll just say this, um, terminology.
Type signature.
NOTE CONF
Function name.
Function.
NOTE CONF
Body.
Um.
NOTE CONF
You know, function body is the thing on the right
hand side of the equal sign.
NOTE CONF
Um, uh, this, uh, this variable here is sometimes known
as a formal parameter.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Formal, uh, as opposed to actual the like here night
NOTE CONF
double applied to night.
This is called an actual parameter.
NOTE CONF
It's an actual value as opposed to a name for
a value.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Formal is not like wearing a necktie.
NOTE CONF
It's it's to do with form.
Uh, technical word.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
This thing here is called an expression.
NOTE CONF
This is also an expression.
Um, and so forth.
NOTE CONF
The whole thing is called a function definition.
Um, I wanted to get to this last slide.
NOTE CONF
This is about defining a type yourself.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And I'm including this because Julian, when he starts talking
about, um, logic and computation, one of the things that
NOTE CONF
you're going to be doing in the first lectures is
using Haskell to do some to encode some logic.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And he's going to be using, um, some of what
NOTE CONF
I'm showing you here.
So this is a way to define a new type
NOTE CONF
as a name for an old type okay.
So a pick pick trans or picture transformer is is
NOTE CONF
a is a type of things which take pictures and
produce pictures.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So double is a pick trans okay.
NOTE CONF
You can define a type.
So this is called a type abbreviation.
NOTE CONF
You can you can define type abbreviations with variables in
them.
NOTE CONF
Um so trans of a type A is a is
a is a type which takes an a to an
NOTE CONF
a.
So um, so double is not just a trans.
NOTE CONF
It's not just a picture to picture.
It's also a trans picture trends applied.
NOTE CONF
So this is a this is like a type function.
Trans applied to the type picture okay.
NOTE CONF
And you can find entirely new types.
So this is the type of of weekdays.
NOTE CONF
And you can define them.
There's there's various ways of defining types using this data.
NOTE CONF
Um word here okay.
One way is to enumerate all the possibilities.
NOTE CONF
So here are all the possible days of the week
okay.
NOTE CONF
And so Monday is a weekday.
Thursday is a weekday because they're in this list.
NOTE CONF
And you can do things with these like compare them
to see if they're equal okay.
NOTE CONF
They aren't.
So it's the answer is false okay.
NOTE CONF
Um notice the difference between comparison equality comparison and equality
definition here and here and here and so forth.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, double equals for equality comparison.
NOTE CONF
There's going to be a lot more in this course
about, uh, Type definitions, but these are some very simple
NOTE CONF
ones you're going to need for Julian's, um, lectures.
And I have two minutes.
NOTE CONF
And this allows me to, um, first of all, are
there any questions about any of that?
NOTE CONF
Yep.
Uh, wait a minute.
NOTE CONF
Let me go back to that here.
A yeah.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, that would be a formal parameter and this would
be an actual parameter.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Somebody else.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Um, this may be a bit more of a set
NOTE CONF
of questions, but, um, are you able to essentially.
So you had like the beside beside besides the triple,
NOTE CONF
are you able to do that.
Um, like have, you know, let's just say an emphasis
NOTE CONF
for instance.
Um, that would do that infinitely, I guess.
NOTE CONF
Well, you could do that two and end number of
minds.
NOTE CONF
Uh, you can have a list of a list of
values to be able to do it with more than
NOTE CONF
to, to be able to do an arbitrary number.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
There's no notation that would conveniently allow you to do
that.
NOTE CONF
I think is what you're asking about.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
What's that?
Uh, pic trans is not a type class.
NOTE CONF
I'll tell you about type classes later, okay?
It's a type.
NOTE CONF
Function.
So I don't see any other hands.
NOTE CONF
I just want to show you this thing.
I've been asked to show you this.
NOTE CONF
This is, um, computing support in informatics.
Um, so, uh, if you've been to the labs in
NOTE CONF
Appleton Tower, you will see that, um, there are computers
there.
NOTE CONF
You can use these.
You can get you can get a password for them.
NOTE CONF
And the reason why you might want to use these
is because Haskell is installed and it works.
NOTE CONF
And, um.
All of the tutorial exercises are tested, uh, to make
NOTE CONF
sure that they work on those on that installation.
Um, it could be that when you install Haskell on
NOTE CONF
your own laptop or home home desktop computer that you've
done something wrong.
NOTE CONF
Whatever it is, it's hard to know what you might
have done.
NOTE CONF
If you have trouble, it might be worth going through
the labs and using the computers there.
NOTE CONF
They run a version of Linux called dice.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And um, there's a link to this.
Sorry, there's a link to this on the, in the,
NOTE CONF
in the course, uh, just the week, week one page.
And so you can look this up yourself.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
If you're interested.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Um, for your patience.
Um.
NOTE CONF
I tried installing the program on my computer last night,
I had trouble.
NOTE CONF
Can I go to the drop in lab?
Yes, that's the whole point.
NOTE CONF